docs/wip: add work-in-progress doc for ingress (#2988)
openservicemesh/osm: docs/content/docs/wip/ingress.md

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f docs/example/manifests/samples/ingress-httpbin.yaml -n httpbin
    ```

    Confirm that the httpbin-ingress has been successfully deployed. 
    
    ```console
    $ kubectl get ingress -n httpbin
    NAME              CLASS    HOSTS   ADDRESS         PORTS   AGE
    httpbin-ingress   <none>   *       20.72.132.186   80      11h
    ```

1. Confirm that a request to the httpbin service from the external IP address of the Ingress resource succeeds (in this case, the external address would be `20.72.132.186`)

    ```bash
    curl http://<external-ip>/status/200
    ```

## Other ingress configuration examples

The following section describes sample ingress configurations used to expose services managed by OSM outside the cluster. The configuration might differ based on the ingress controller being used.

The example configurations describe how to expose HTTP and HTTPS routes for the `bookstore-v1` service running on a pod with the service acccount `bookstore-v1` on port `14001` in the `bookstore` namespace, outside the cluster. The ingress configuration will expose the HTTP path `/books-bought` on the `bookstore-v1` service.

> Since OSM uses its own root certificate, the ingress controller must be provisioned with OSM's root certificate to be able to authenticate the certificate presented by backend servers when using HTTPS ingress. With `Tresor` as the certificate provider, OSM stores the CA root certificate in a Kubernetes secret named `osm-ca-bundle` with the key `ca.crt` in the namespace OSM is deployed (`osm-system` by default). When using other certificate providers such as `cert-manager.io` or `Hashicorp Vault`, the `osm-ca-bundle` secret must be created by the user with the base64 encoded root certificate stored as the value to the `ca.crt` attribute in the secret's data.

Reviewer: thanks for this, this was missing since one of my changes for HA

Author: I'm going to change the examples to use the httpbin service (like I did in the demo) instead of bookstore

---
title: "Ingress"
description: "How to expose HTTP and HTTPS routes outside the cluster to services within the cluster using Kubernetes Ingress"
type: docs
aliases: ["ingress.md"]
---

# OSM Ingress Guide

> The OSM ingress doc is a walkthrough of how to expose HTTP and HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services inside the cluster, and which ingress resources are compatible with OSM v0.8.0. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OSM ingress guide is a walkthrough on exposing HTTP and HTTPS routes on services within the mesh externally using the Kubernetes Ingress API. 
```

## Prerequisites
- An instance of OSM must be running in the cluster.
- The service needing to be exposed using Ingress needs to belong to a namespace monitored by OSM. Refer to the [Readme][1] for details.
- The ingress resource must belong to the same namespace as the backend service.
- A sidecar must be injected to the pod hosting the service, either using automatic sidecar injection or by manually annotating the pod spec for sidecar injection. Refer to the [Readme][1] for details.

> - An ingress controller must be running in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: Add one more important prereq the existing doc is missing:
```suggestion
- An ingress controller must be running in the cluster.
- The `networking/v1beta1` API must be used for the Kubernetes Ingress resource
```

## What is ingress? 

> Ingress refers to communication from services outside of your cluster to services inside the cluster, usually via HTTP/HTTPS. In kubernetes, Ingress consists of an Ingress API object and an Ingress Controller. The Kubernetes Ingress API manifest consists of declarations of how clients are routed to a service inside the cluster, and the Ingress controller executes the routing declarations specified in the manifest. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ingress refers to providing external access to services within the cluster, usually via HTTP/HTTPS. In kubernetes, Ingress consists of an Ingress API object and an Ingress Controller. The Kubernetes Ingress API manifest consists of declarations of how clients are routed to a service inside the cluster, and the Ingress controller executes the routing declarations specified in the manifest. 
```

## Why do you need ingress on your cluster? 

Initially, when you group pods under a service, this service is only accessible inside of the cluster. One option, of course, is to use a load balancer. However, the downside of this approach is that each service would require a new hosted load balancer, meaning more consumption of cloud resources. 

However, Ingress allows you to easily establish rules for traffic routing without creating several load balancers. The Ingress Controller is built using reverse proxies, allowing it to act as a load balancer. Though the Ingress Controller requires a service to expose them to services outside of the cluster, this will be the only entrypoint that outside services need to access all the internal services on your cluster, as the Ingress Controller will redirect this traffic to the internal pods as specified in the Ingress Manifest. 

## What types of ingress are supported by OSM v0.8.0?

> Currently, OSM v0.8.0 supports http and single service Ingress. HTTPS ingress support is experimental. OSM supports one way TLS authentication to backend services.

Reviewer 2: What does single service ingress mean here?

Author: I will reword this section this to make it more clear

## Ingress controller compatibility

Ingress in OSM is compatible with the following ingress controllers.
- [Kubernetes Nginx Ingress Controller][2]
- [Azure Application Gateway Ingress Controller][3]
- [Gloo API Gateway][5]

Other ingress controllers might also work as long as they use Kubernetes Ingress resource, and allow provisioning a custom root certificate for HTTPS backend server certificate validation while using HTTPS ingress.

## Configuring Ingress

### Enabling Ingress

> Ingress is disabled by default when OSM is installed. However, HTTPS ingress can be enabled by updating the `osm-config` ConfigMap in `osm-controller`'s namespace (`osm-system` by default).

Reviewer 2: This statement is incorrect. Ingress is enabled when an ingress resource is applied. By default, HTTP based ingress is provisioned in OSM, which is a global setting. The config map allows globally configuring HTTPS ingress instead when an ingress resource is applied.

Patch the ConfigMap by setting use_https_ingress: "true".
> Note: To make this change persistent between upgrades, see osm mesh upgrade --help.
```bash
# Replace osm-system with osm-controller's namespace if using a non default namespace

> kubectl patch ConfigMap osm-config -n osm-system -p '{"data":{"use_https_ingress":"true"}}' --type=merge

Reviewer 2: This is only required when one needs to use HTTPS ingress, and there should be a separate section for this. It can be left out for now if you want to document HTTPS ingress support in a subsequent PR.

Author: I'll distinguish between HTTP and HTTPS in this section.

```

By default, OSM configures HTTP as the backend protocol for services when an ingress resource is applied with a backend service that belongs to the mesh. A mesh-wide configuration setting in OSM's `osm-config` ConfigMap enables configuring ingress with the backend protocol to be HTTPS. 

### Disabling Ingress

Patch the ConfigMap by setting use_https_ingress: "false".
> Note: To make this change persistent between upgrades, see osm mesh upgrade --help.
```bash
# Replace osm-system with osm-controller's namespace if using a non default namespace

> kubectl patch ConfigMap osm-config -n osm-system -p '{"data":{"use_https_ingress":"false"}}' --type=merge

Reviewer 2: This is not really disabling ingress, it is disabling HTTPS ingress, while doing so will implicitly enable HTTP ingress.

            serviceName: httpbin
            servicePort: 14001
    ```

    Confirm that the httpbin-ingress has been successfully deployed. 
    
    ```console
    $ kubectl get ingress -n httpbin
    NAME              CLASS    HOSTS   ADDRESS         PORTS   AGE
    httpbin-ingress   <none>   *       20.72.132.186   80      11h
    ```

1. Confirm that a request to the httpbin service from the external IP address of the Ingress resource succeeds (in this case, the external address would be `20.72.132.186`)

    ```bash
    curl http://<external-ip>/status/200
    ```

1. Update the existing ingress with a host specified by applying the following yaml, and confirm that the request succeeds:  

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: Ingress
    metadata:
    name: httpbin-ingress
    namespace: httpbin
    annotations:
        kubernetes.io/ingress.class: nginx
    spec:
    rules:
    - host: httpbin.com 
        http:
        paths:
        - path: /status/200
            backend:
            serviceName: httpbin
            servicePort: 14001
    ```

    ```bash
    curl http://<external-ip>/status/200 -H "Host: httpbin.com"
    ```

> ## Other ingress configuration examples

Reviewer 2: This title is ambiguous, can it be made more specific?
Ex. `Sample ingress configurations`

## Why do you need ingress on your cluster? 

Initially, when you group pods under a service, this service is only accessible inside of the cluster. One option, of course, is to use a load balancer. However, the downside of this approach is that each service would require a new hosted load balancer, meaning more consumption of cloud resources. 

However, Ingress allows you to easily establish rules for traffic routing without creating several load balancers. The Ingress Controller is built using reverse proxies, allowing it to act as a load balancer. Though the Ingress Controller requires a service to expose them to services outside of the cluster, this will be the only entrypoint that outside services need to access all the internal services on your cluster, as the Ingress Controller will redirect this traffic to the internal pods as specified in the Ingress Manifest. 

## What types of ingress are supported by OSM v0.8.0?

> Currently, OSM v0.8.0 supports http Ingress. HTTPS ingress support is experimental. OSM supports one way TLS authentication to backend services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, OSM v0.8.0 supports HTTP ingress. HTTPS ingress support is experimental, with support for one-way TLS authentication to backend services.
```

## Ingress controller compatibility

Ingress in OSM is compatible with the following ingress controllers.
- [Kubernetes Nginx Ingress Controller][2]
- [Azure Application Gateway Ingress Controller][3]
- [Gloo API Gateway][5]

Other ingress controllers might also work as long as they use Kubernetes Ingress resource, and allow provisioning a custom root certificate for HTTPS backend server certificate validation while using HTTPS ingress.

## Configuring Ingress

> ### Enabling Ingress

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enabling HTTP or HTTPS Ingress
```

#### HTTP ingress
HTTP based ingress is provisioned in OSM by default. 

#### HTTPS ingress
HTTPs Ingress is disabled by default when OSM is installed. However, HTTPS ingress can be enabled by updating the `osm-config` ConfigMap in `osm-controller`'s namespace (`osm-system` by default). 

Patch the ConfigMap by setting use_https_ingress: "true".
> Note: To make this change persistent between upgrades, see osm mesh upgrade --help.
> Note: Enabling HTTPS ingress will disable HTTP ingress. 
```bash
# Replace osm-system with osm-controller's namespace if using a non default namespace
kubectl patch ConfigMap osm-config -n osm-system -p '{"data":{"use_https_ingress":"true"}}' --type=merge
```

> By default, OSM configures HTTP as the backend protocol for services when an ingress resource is applied with a backend service that belongs to the mesh. A mesh-wide configuration setting in OSM's `osm-config` ConfigMap enables configuring ingress with the backend protocol to be HTTPS. 

Reviewer 2: This should be set around L46, before going into configuring HTTP and HTTPS ingress.

> ### Disabling Ingress

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Disabling HTTP or HTTPS Ingress
```

#### HTTP ingress

HTTP ingress can be disabled by enabling HTTPS ingress.

#### HTTPs ingress

Patch the ConfigMap by setting use_https_ingress: "false".

> Note: Disabling HTTPS ingress will enable HTTP ingress. 

```bash
# Replace osm-system with osm-controller's namespace if using a non default namespace
kubectl patch ConfigMap osm-config -n osm-system -p '{"data":{"use_https_ingress":"false"}}' --type=merge
```

## How it works

### Exposing an HTTP or HTTPS service using Ingress

> A service can expose HTTP or HTTPS routes outside the cluster using Kubernetes Ingress along with an ingress controller. Once an ingress resource is configured to expose HTTP routes outside the cluster to a service within the cluster, OSM will configure the sidecar proxy on pods to allow ingress traffic to the service based on the ingress routing rules defined by the Kubernetes Ingress resource. Keep in mind, this behavior opens up HTTP-based access to any client that is not a part of the service mesh, not just ingress. Keep in mind that the ingress resource that allows external HTTP access to a particular service must be in the same namespace as that service. 

Reviewer 2: I would move the 2 `Keep in mind` sentences under:
```
Note:
1.
2.
```

- The ingress resource must belong to the same namespace as the backend service.
- A sidecar must be injected to the pod hosting the service, either using automatic sidecar injection or by manually annotating the pod spec for sidecar injection. Refer to the [Readme][1] for details.
- An ingress controller must be running in the cluster.
- The `networking/v1beta1` API must be used for the Kubernetes Ingress resource

## What is ingress? 

Ingress refers to providing external access to services inside the cluster, usually via HTTP/HTTPS. In kubernetes, Ingress consists of an Ingress API object and an Ingress Controller. The Kubernetes Ingress API manifest consists of declarations of how clients are routed to a service inside the cluster, and the Ingress controller executes the routing declarations specified in the manifest. 

## Why do you need ingress on your cluster? 

Initially, when you group pods under a service, this service is only accessible inside of the cluster. One option, of course, is to use a load balancer. However, the downside of this approach is that each service would require a new hosted load balancer, meaning more consumption of cloud resources. 

> However, Ingress allows you to easily establish rules for traffic routing without creating several load balancers. The Ingress Controller is built using reverse proxies, allowing it to act as a load balancer. Though the Ingress Controller requires a service to expose them to services outside of the cluster, this will be the only entrypoint that outside services need to access all the internal services on your cluster, as the Ingress Controller will redirect this traffic to the internal pods as specified in the Ingress Manifest. 

Reviewer 3: nit: used in prev sentence too
```suggestion
Ingress allows you to easily establish rules for traffic routing without creating several load balancers. The Ingress Controller is built using reverse proxies, allowing it to act as a load balancer. Though the Ingress Controller requires a service to expose them to services outside of the cluster, this will be the only entrypoint that outside services need to access all the internal services on your cluster, as the Ingress Controller will redirect this traffic to the internal pods as specified in the Ingress Manifest. 
```

## Ingress controller compatibility

Ingress in OSM is compatible with the following ingress controllers.
- [Kubernetes Nginx Ingress Controller][2]
- [Azure Application Gateway Ingress Controller][3]
- [Gloo API Gateway][5]

Other ingress controllers might also work as long as they use Kubernetes Ingress resource, and allow provisioning a custom root certificate for HTTPS backend server certificate validation while using HTTPS ingress.

## Configuring Ingress

### Enabling HTTP or HTTPS Ingress

By default, OSM configures HTTP as the backend protocol for services when an ingress resource is applied with a backend service that belongs to the mesh. A mesh-wide configuration setting in OSM's `osm-config` ConfigMap enables configuring ingress with the backend protocol to be HTTPS. 

#### HTTP ingress
HTTP based ingress is provisioned in OSM by default. 

#### HTTPS ingress
HTTPs Ingress is disabled by default when OSM is installed. However, HTTPS ingress can be enabled by updating the `osm-config` ConfigMap in `osm-controller`'s namespace (`osm-system` by default). 

Patch the ConfigMap by setting use_https_ingress: "true".

> > Note: To make this change persistent between upgrades, see osm mesh upgrade --help.

Reviewer 3: same comment as on the troubleshooting doc

> > Note: Enabling HTTPS ingress will disable HTTP ingress. 

Reviewer 3: nit: new line
```suggestion

> Note: Enabling HTTPS ingress will disable HTTP ingress. 
```

The example configurations describe how to expose HTTP and HTTPS routes for the `httpbin` service running on a pod with the service account `httpbin` on port `14001` in the `httpbin` namespace, outside the cluster. The ingress configuration will expose the HTTP path `/status/200` on the `httpbin` service.

Since OSM uses its own root certificate, the ingress controller must be provisioned with OSM's root certificate to be able to authenticate the certificate presented by backend servers when using HTTPS ingress. With `Tresor` as the certificate provider, OSM stores the CA root certificate in a Kubernetes secret named `osm-ca-bundle` with the key `ca.crt` in the namespace OSM is deployed (`osm-system` by default). When using other certificate providers such as `cert-manager.io` or `Hashicorp Vault`, the `osm-ca-bundle` secret must be created by the user with the base64 encoded root certificate stored as the value to the `ca.crt` attribute in the secret's data.

### Prerequisites
- Install [nginx ingress controller](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/deploy/#installation-guide)

> An ingress configuration yaml with [Nginx Ingress Controller][2] for the `httpbin` service described above would look as follows.

Reviewer 3: indentation levels of these bullets are a lil confusing to me

Author: I don't think the line on 199 is necessary. I can remove that.

        # proxy_ssl_name for a service is of the form <service-account>.<namespace>.cluster.local
        nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/configuration-snippet: |
          proxy_ssl_name "httpbin.httpbin.cluster.local";
        # k8s secret with CA certificate stored with key ca.crt
        nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-ssl-secret: "osm-system/osm-ca-bundle"
        nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-ssl-server-name: "on" # optional
        nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-ssl-verify: "on"
    spec:
      rules:
      - host: httpbin.com
        http:
          paths:
          - path: /status/200
            backend:
              serviceName: httpbin
              servicePort: 14001
    ```
    Accessing the service:
    ```bash
    curl http://<external-ingress-ip>/status/200 -H "Host: httpbin.com"
    ```

### Using Azure Application Gateway Ingress Controller (experimental)

An ingress configuration yaml with [Azure Application Gateway Ingress Controller][3] for the `httpbin` service described above would look as follows.

- Specify the ingress controller as Azure Application Gateway using the annotation `kubernetes.io/ingress.class: azure/application-gateway`.

> HTTPS ingress requires additional annotations to be specified.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
HTTPS ingress requires additional annotations to be specified:
```

glooctl create secret tls --name osm-ca-bundle --rootca osm-c-bundlea.pem
```

Next we could use an Ingress file like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: httpbin-ingress
  namespace: httpbin
  annotations:
    kubernetes.io/ingress.class: gloo
spec:
  rules:
  - host: httpbin.httpbin.svc.cluster.local
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /status/200
        backend:
          serviceName: httpbin
          servicePort: 14001
```

Lastly, we configure the `Upstream` object to use OSM's root ca bundle:

```yaml
apiVersion: gloo.solo.io/v1
kind: Upstream
metadata:
  name: httpbin-httpbin-14001
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  sslConfig:
    sni: "httpbin.httpbin.svc.cluster.local"
    secretRef:
      name: osm-ca-bundle
      namespace: gloo-system
  kube:
    selector:
      app: httpbin
    serviceName: httpbin
    serviceNamespace: httpbin
    servicePort: 14001

```

At this point you can call your Ingress endpoint and get HTTPS traffic from the edge to your OSM service. As a convenience, you can run the following to get your ingress hostname/IP:

```bash
glooctl proxy url --name ingress-proxy
```

> ## Envoy Configurations

Reviewer 3: ?

Author: This section will be added later in a subsequent PR.

Author: Will remove it for now though.
